>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MARCH 22...
A NEW ISIS THREAT AGAINST
AMERICAN MILITARY PERSONNEL AND
THEIR FAMILIES.
THE PENTAGON IS ORDERED TO
RELEASE POTENTIALLY INFLAMMATORY
PHOTOGRAPHS DOCUMENTING THE
ABUSE OF DETAINEES.
WHAT'S NEXT?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE DEBATE OVER THE LEGALIZATION
OF SPORTS BETTING.
>> LET'S FIGURE OUT A LEGAL WAY
TO DO THIS WHERE IT CAN BE
REGULATED, IT CAN BE TAXED.
>> THE DEBATE IS, SHOULD
GOVERNMENT BE SPONSORING
PREDATORY FORMS OF GAMBLING?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
OFFICIALS TODAY URGED U.S.
MILITARY PERSONNEL TO BE
VIGILANT AND TO DO ALL THEY CAN
TO KEEP PERSONAL INFORMATION
OFFLINE, THIS AFTER ISIS
REPORTEDLY POSTED THE NAMES,
PHOTOS AND HOME ADDRESSES OF 100
AMERICAN SERVICEMEN AND URGED
ITS SUPPORTERS TO KILL THEM.
THE LIST REPORTEDLY INCLUDES
PHOTOGRAPHS OF MARINES, SAILORS
AND AIRMEN, MANY OF THEM PILOTS
WHO HAVE STRUCK ISIS TARGETS IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA.
THE LIST WAS PUBLISHED BY GROUP
CALLING ITSELF THE ISLAMIC STATE
HACKING DIVISION, BUT A PENTAGON
OFFICIAL SAID THE PERSONAL
INFORMATION APPARENTLY WAS
GLEANED FROM PUBLIC RECORDS AND
ONLINE SEARCHES.
A DAY AFTER SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY AND IRANIAN PRESIDENT
HASSAN ROUHANI SIGNALED THAT THE
WEST AND IRAN ARE GETTING CLOSE
TO A NUCLEAR DEAL,
CIA DIRECTOR JOHN BRENNAN
OFFERED ASSURANCES TODAY THAT
IRAN WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO CHEAT
ON IT.
>> IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF
TRUSTING THE IRANIANS ON THIS.
I KNOW THAT SECRETARY KERRY AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA ARE COMFORTABLE
WITH WHAT IT IS THAT WE ARE
INSISTING ON AS FAR AS A
VERIFICATION REGIME.
>> BUT FRANKLY OUR TRACK RECORD
WHEN IT COMES TO IRAN AND ITS
NUCLEAR PROGRAM IS NOT GOOD.
IRANIAN OPPOSITION GROUPS IN
2002 WERE THE ONES THAT REVEALED
THAT THE REGIME HAD SECRET
FACILITIES AT NATANZ AND IRAQ
AND ONE OF YOUR PREDECESSORS
MICHAEL HAYDEN SAID THEY HAD
DONE A LOT OF WORK AT FORDO
BEFORE WE KNEW ABOUT IT.
FACT IS THEY FOOLED US
REPEATEDLY THE IRANIANS.
>> AND I THINK WE'VE GONE TO
SCHOOL ON SOME OF THOSE
DEVELOPMENTS OVER THE LAST
DECADE OR SO, SO THAT NOW WE CAN
HAVE BETTER PLAN OPPORTUNITY TO
VERIFY SOME OF THE THINGS THEY
ARE SAYING THEY'RE GOING TO DO
AND NOT DO.
>> Sreenivasan: DISAGREEMENTS
ABOUT THOSE NUCLEAR NEGOTIATIONS
HAVE FUELED TENSIONS BETWEEN
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU AND PRESIDENT OBAMA.
AND SO DID A RECENT COMMENT BY
THE ISRAELI LEADER EXPRESSING
OPPOSITION TO A TWO-STATE
SOLUTION WITH THE PALESTINIANS.
TODAY, THE ISRAELI AMBASSADOR TO
THE UNITED STATES SOUGHT TO
CLARIFY THE PRIME MINISTER'S
POSITION.
>> HE IS COMMITTED TO A VISION
OF PEACE OF TWO STATES FOR TWO
PEOPLES, A DEMILITARIZED
PALESTINIAN STATE THAT
RECOGNIZES THE JEWISH STATE OF
ISRAEL.
WHAT HAS CHANGED IS THE
CIRCUMSTANCES OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS.
WE HAVE A COLLAPSE OF 100 YEAR
ORDER IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND
MILITANT ISLAM IS CHARGING INTO
THE VOID.
THAT'S THE FIRST THING THAT
CHANGED.
THE SECOND THING THAT CHANGED
IS THAT A YEAR AGO, TEN MONTHS
AGO, THE LEADER OF THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY REACHED
OUT TO A TERROR ORGANIZATION AND
FORGED AN ALLIANCE WITH HAMAS.
WHAT ISRAEL BELIEVES HAS TO
HAPPEN NOW IS THAT PRESIDENT
ABBAS HAS TO BREAK HIS ALLIANCE
WITH HAMAS AND RETURN TO PEACE
NEGOTIATIONS WITH ISRAEL.
IF THAT HAPPENS AND WE CAN SOLVE
THE PROBLEM OF ISRAEL'S
LEGITIMATE SECURITY NEEDS, THEN
WE CAN GET BACK TO THE PEACE
TABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN YEMEN TODAY,
PRO-IRANIAN REBELS SEIZED KEY
LOCATIONS IN THE NATION'S THIRD
LARGEST CITY.
A DEVELOPMENT REGIONAL OFFICIALS
SAY COULD HAVE SERIOUS
CONSEQUENCES FOR SECURITY AND
STABILITY
REPORTEDLY, REBELS THERE FIRED
GUNS AND TEAR GAS TO DISPERSE
DEMONSTRATORS WHO HAD GATHERED
TO PROTEST THEIR PRESENCE
IN KABUL, AFGHANISTAN TODAY,
HUNDREDS OF WOMEN'S RIGHTS
ACTIVISTS TURNED OUT FOR THE
FUNERAL OF A 27-YEAR-OLD WOMAN
WHO WAS BEATEN, SET ON FIRE AND
TOSSED INTO A RIVER BY A MOB OF
MEN EARLIER THIS WEEK.
THEY HAD ACCUSED HER OF
DESECRATING A KORAN, A CHARGE
AUTHORITIES DISPUTE.
THE PRESIDENT OF AFGHANISTAN,
ASHRAF GHANI, CONDEMNED THE
ATTACK AND CALLED FOR AN
INVESTIGATION.
13 PEOPLE REPORTEDLY HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED SO FAR.
TURNING NOW TO NEWS FROM EUROPE.
THERE WAS VOTING TODAY IN LOCAL
ELECTIONS THROUGHOUT FRANCE, AND
EARLY INDICATIONS ARE THAT THE
FAR RIGHT LED BY THE NATIONAL
FRONT PARTY LEADER, MARINE LE
PEN, MADE GAINS ALONG WITH
FORMER PRESIDENT NICHOLAS
SARKOZY'S PARTY.
TO EXPLAIN WHAT HAPPENED AND
WHAT IT MEANS, WE ARE JOINED NOW
VIA SKYPE FROM PARIS BY ELEANOR
BEARDSLEY OF NPR.
>> ELEANOR WE USUALLY WOULD NOT
CARE ABOUT A LOCAL ELECTION OR
LOCAL ELECTIONS IN FRANCE.
WHY DID THIS ONE BECOME SO
INTERESTING?
>> THIS IS A LOCAL SORT OF
ELECTIONS PEOPLE DON'T USUALLY
GO VOTE IN HUGE NUMBERS.
IT BECAME VERY INTERESTING
BECAUSE THE NATIONAL FRONT THE
TAR RIGHT NATIONAL FRONT PARTY
WAS IN THE LEAD, SO THE PARTIES
ON THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT BECAME
VERY SCARED AND TOLD VOTERS YOU
GOT TO GO OUT AND VOTE BECAUSE
IF YOU DON'T VOTE THAT'S A PULL
AWAY FROM THE NATIONAL FRONT.
THERE WAS NOT THIS HUGE WAVE OF
VOTES FOR THE NATIONAL FRONT.
THE LEAD PARTY WAS NICHOLAS
SARKOZY'S MAINSTREAM PARTY.
ABOUT 50% OF VOTERS TURNED OUT
ON THE FIRST ROUND OF THIS POLL
AND THEY VOTED IN THE MAINSTREAM
CONSERVATIVE PARTY.
SECOND PLACE WAS THE SOCIALIST
PARTY.
THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF
DISENCHANTMENT WITH BE
SOCIALIST PRESIDENT FRANCOIS
HOLLANDE.
AND 24% OF THE VOTE THEY HAD A
DECENT SCORE.
>> ON THAT DECENT SCORE IS THAT
MOTIVATED IN PART BY THE
TERRORIST ATTACK OR IMMIGRATION
POLICIES OR WHAT'S BEEN
HAPPENING?
>> ABSOLUTELY, AFTER CHARLIE
HEBDO ATTACK, THEIR POPULARITY
DOUBLED.
THAT THEY DON'T CONTROL
CORPORATION AND CRIME HAS REALLY
INCREASED THEIR NUMBERS BUT
ANOTHER THING THAT ADDED TO THE
NATIONAL FRONT SUCCESS DURING
THIS CAMPAIGN IS THERE'S A LOT
OF DISENCHANTMENT WITH BOTH
MAINSTREAM PARTIES THAT THEY'RE
THE SAME THING, THAT -- PARTIES
THAT THEY DON'T DO THE SAME
THING, MARINE LE PEN, THE NEW
LEADER FOR THE LAST FOUR YEARS
SHE TOOK OVER FROM HER FATHER,
SHE'S REALLY CHANGED THE IMAGE
OF THE PARTY.
IT USED TO BE SORT OF A GOOD OLD
BOYS CLUB OF THESE FORMER
ALGERIAN FIGHTERS, WITH A LOT OF
ANTI-SEMITISM.
SHE HAS TRIED TO BRING IN A LOT
OF WOMEN AND OTHERS, AND SHE HAS
TO SOME THERE DEGREE.
IN THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENTARY
ELECTIONS.
THEY ACTUALLY HAVE 12 MAYORS
GOVERNING IN FRANCE AND NOT JUST
A SCARE TACTICS PARTY ANYMORE.
THEY ACTUALLY HAVE PEOPLE ON THE
GROUND GOVERNING.
SHE POINTS TO THAT AND SAYS WE
CAN CHANGE THINGS NOW.
>> DOES THAT MEAN SHE HAS THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PERHAPS BECOME
THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS?
>> THAT'S ALWAYS THROWN AROUND.
THE ANALYSTS SAY SHE WANTED TO
USE A BIG WIN IN THE LOCALITY
CANTON ELECTIONS TO USE IT TO
THE PRESIDENCY.
I DON'T THINK SHE'S GOING TO
BECOME PRESIDENT OF FRANCE.
THERE'S TOO MANY PEOPLE AGAINST.
THEY COULD MAKE BIG INROADS IN
MUNICIPAL IN LOCAL ELECTIONS.
THEY COULD RUN TOWNS, THEY COULD
RON CAN TONS, I DON'T THINK SO
SHE'S GOING TO BE ELECTED
PRESIDENT ANY TIME SOON.
>> ELEANOR BEARDSLEY, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM BEIJING
TONIGHT, A RARE ADMISSION ABOUT
THE SEVERITY OF CLIMATE CHANGE:
A TOP CHINESE METEOROLOGICAL
OFFICIAL IS QUOTED AS SAYING
CLIMATE CHANGE IS ALREADY HAVING
WHAT HE CALLED A "HUGE IMPACT"
ON THAT COUNTRY.
HE WARNED OF MORE DROUGHTS AND
CLIMBING TEMPERATURES AND SAID
CROP YIELDS ARE ALREADY
DECLINING.
THE PENTAGON HAS TWO MONTHS TO
DECIDE HOW TO RESPOND TO A COURT
RULING ORDERING IT TO RELEASE
PHOTOGRAPHS DOCUMENTING THE
ABUSE OF PRISONERS IN IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN.
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS WARN THAT
MAKING THE PHOTOS PUBLIC COULD
INFLAME TENSIONS IN THE ALREADY
VERY VOLATILE MIDDLE EAST.
FOR MORE ABOUT THIS, WE ARE
JOINED NOW BY JENNIFER PELTZ OF
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
SO, FIRST OF ALL, ARE THESE
SIMILAR TO OR THE SAME AS THESE
PHOTOS THAT WE SAW ALMOST A
DECADE AGO NOW?
HOW MANY MORE ARE THERE?
>> WELL ALL THAT IS KIND OF A
QUESTION MARK.
OBVIOUSLY BECAUSE THEY HAVEN'T
BEEN SEEN, BUT ALSO, IT'S
UNCLEAR EVEN HOW MANY
PHOTOGRAPHS MAY EXIST.
THIS ALL STEMS FROM A FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION ACT REQUEST THAT THE
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
FILED IN 2003 ASKING FOR
DOCUMENTS ABOUT THE TREATMENT OF
DETAINEES BY THE U.S. MILITARY
IN VARIOUS PLACES AROUND THE
WORLD.
AND THERE HAVE BEEN VARIOUS
NUMBERS FLOATED OVER TIME.
BUT THERE IS A POSSIBILITY THAT
THERE COULD BE HUNDREDS OR EVEN
THOUSANDS OF PHOTOGRAPHS, WHAT
THEY DEPICT, AND WHETHER THEY
DEPICT WHAT COULD BE CONSIDERED
ABUSE IS ALSO UNCLEAR.
>> SO WHAT DOES THE GOVERNMENT
DO IN THESE NEXT TWO MONTHS?
WHAT ARE THEIR OPTIONS?
>> WELL, THE GOVERNMENT ASKED
FOR A COUPLE OF MONTHS TO DECIDE
WHETHER IT SHOULD APPEAL OR
WHETHER IT WANTED TO APPEAL.
SO THAT'S ONE THING THAT
APPARENTLY THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT WILL BE DECIDING.
IT'S ALSO POSSIBLE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT COULD TRY TO ANSWER
SOME OF THE JUDGE'S QUESTIONS
ABOUT SPECIFICALLY WHAT THESE
PHOTOGRAPHS ARE, AND
SPECIFICALLY WHY EACH ONE SHOULD
BE WITHHELD.
>> AND SO THIS OF COURSE DOESN'T
SIT BEEN WITH THE ACLU WHO WON
THIS RULING AT THE MOMENT.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THEIR ORGANIZATION HAS WANTED
THESE TO BE RELEASED FOR MORE
THAN A DECADE.
IT FEELS AT A THESE ARE
IMPORTANT AND TELLING RECORDS OF
HOW THE MILITARY TREATED DETAIN
DETAINEES AND THAT THEY SHOULD
BE KNOWN HOWEVER DISTURBING THEY
MAY BE.
>> IN TOTALITY, NOT FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TO DECIDE WHICH
SHOULD BE PUBLIC AND WHICH
SHOULD BE PRIVATE?
>> A LAW PASSED IN 2009 DOES
ALLOW THE GOVERNMENT TO WITHHOLD
PHOTOGRAPHS IF IT BELIEVES THAT
THEY ARE GOING TO INCITE HARMS
TO PEOPLE OVERSEAS.
IT'S HARD TO EXPLAIN THIS
WITHOUT GETTING A LITTLE BIT
GRANULAR BUT ESSENTIALLY ONE OF
THE OBJECTION HE THAT THE ACLU
HAS AND THE JUDGE HAS TO HOW THE
GOVERNMENT HAS PROCEEDED IS THAT
IT'S SAID IN A RATHER BLANKET
WAY, ALL OF THESE PHOTOGRAPHS
FALL INTO THE CATEGORY OF WHAT
SHOULD BE WITHHELD.
AND BOTH THE ACLU AND THE
GOVERNMENT FEEL THAT INSTEAD
THERE SHOULD BE MORE SPECIFICITY
ABOUT EACH ONE, WHY IT SHOULD BE
WITHHELD, AND WHY NOW, OR AT
LEAST, DOCUMENTATION THAT THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE OR ANOTHER
HIGH LEVEL DEFENSE OFFICIAL HAS
SEEN THEM ALL, CONSIDERED THEM
ALL INDIVIDUALLY.
>> ALL RIGHT, JENNIFER PELTZ OF
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS, THANKS SO
MUCH.
AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, THE DEBATE ABOUT
LEGALIZING BETTING ON SPORTS
EVENTS.
LIKE MILLIONS OF OTHER
AMERICANS, EARLIER THIS WEEK,
PRESIDENT OBAMA FILLED OUT HIS
BRACKET PREDICTING THE OUTCOME
OF THE N.C.A.A. BASKETBALL
TOURNAMENT.
AS FAR AS ANYONE KNOWS, THE
PRESIDENT ISN'T BETTING MONEY ON
THE GAMES, BUT MILLIONS OF
OTHERS ARE.
AND THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF
THOSE BETS ARE ILLEGAL.
RECENTLY, THE COMMISSIONER OF
THE NATIONAL BASKETBALL
ASSOCIATION SAID THE U.S. SHOULD
CONSIDER REPEALING THE FEDERAL
BAN ON SPORTS GAMBLING.
AND HE'S NOT ALONE.
THERE'S A PUSH UNDERWAY IN
CONGRESS AND IN CASH-STARVED
STATES TO LEGALIZE IT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S WILLIAM BRANGHAM
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: RIGHT NOW, MILLIONS
OF BASKETBALL FANS IN AMERICA
ARE BREAKING THE LAW, BY BETTING
ON THE NCAA'S MARCH MADNESS
TOURNAMENT.
AND IT'S NOT JUST COLLEGE HOOPS,
IT'S BETS PLACED ON ANY SPORT:
THE NFL, MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL,
THE NBA.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EVERY YEAR
ARE WAGERED, BUT, EXCEPT FOR
BETS PLACED IN PERSON, IN LAS
VEGAS, THEY'RE ALMOST ALL
ILLEGAL.
CHAD MILLMAN IS THE EDITOR OF
ESPN THE MAGAZINE, WHICH PUT NBA
COMMISSIONER ADAM SILVER, AND
HIS DISCUSSION OF LEGALIZING
SPORTS BETTING, ON LAST MONTH'S
FRONT COVER.
>> Reporter: RIGHT NOW, OUTSIDE
OF LAS VEGAS, IT IS ILLEGAL FOR
ME TO PLACE A BET ON SPORTS.
SO HOW DOES ONE GO ABOUT DOING
THAT?
>> YOU CALL YOUR BOOKIE.
YOU GO ONLINE.
A LOT, THERE'S A LOT OF INTERNET
SITES WHERE YOU CAN MAKE A BET.
>> Reporter: OFF-SHORE BETTING
SITES LIKE THIS ONE, CALLED
BOVADA, ARE A HUGE HUB FOR
BETTING ON SPORTS.
IT'S ILLEGAL FOR AMERICANS TO
USE THESE SITES, BUT THEY DO.
AUTHORITIES HAVE CRACKED DOWN ON
THESE TRANSACTIONS RECENTLY, BUT
THEY STILL CONTINUE.
NOTICE THE WEBSITE'S ADDRESS,
IT'S bovada.lv, YOU MIGHT THINK
THAT STANDS FOR "LAS VEGAS?"
NO, IT'S LATVIA.
BECAUSE IT'S A BLACK MARKET,
IT'S HARD TO KNOW EXACTLY HOW
MUCH MONEY GETS WAGERED
ILLEGALLY, BUT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT ESTIMATED IT RANGES
FROM $80 TO $300 BILLION, THAT'S
BILLION WITH A "B," EVERY YEAR.
>> Reporter: SO THAT'S A LOT OF
MONEY.
>> IT'S A LOT OF MONEY THAT'S
NOT BEING TAXED.
A LOT OF MONEY THAT IS GOING
UNDER THE TABLE.
>> Reporter: THESE DAYS, IT'S
NOT JUST THE COMMISSIONER OF THE
NBA WHO SAYS THIS SITUATION
NEEDS TO CHANGE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF CASH-STRAPPED
STATES THAT WANT IN ON THAT
ACTION, TOO.
THE RESORT TOWN OF ATLANTIC CITY
IS IN DIRE ECONOMIC STRAITS, ITS
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS 11%, DOUBLE
THE NATIONAL AVERAGE.
SEVERAL OF THE CITY'S HUGE
CASINOS ARE SHUTTERED, HIT BY
THE ONE-TWO PUNCH OF THE
FINANCIAL CRISIS, AND
COMPETITION FROM NEW CASINOS IN
NEIGHBORING STATES.
SOME IN NEW JERSEY NOW WANT TO
TAP INTO ILLEGAL SPORTS BETTING
TO REVIVE THIS AREA.
>> SO THE WHOLE IDEA CAME AS A
RESULT OF THE CASINO AND THE
RACETRACK INDUSTRY BEING ON HARD
TIMES.
>> Reporter: DENNIS DRAZIN IS A
LAWYER WHO REPRESENTS MONMOUTH
PARK RACETRACK IN NEW JERSEY,
AND HE'S HELPED CHAMPION AN
EFFORT TO LEGALIZE SPORTS
BETTING AT THE STATES CASINOS
AND RACETRACKS.
HE SAYS THE BETTING IS ALREADY
HAPPENING, SO WHY LET THE
CRIMINALS BE THE ONES TO PROFIT?
>> LET'S FIGURE OUT A LEGAL WAY
TO DO THIS WHERE IT CAN BE
REGULATED, IT CAN BE TAXED, IT
CAN PROVIDE REVENUES NOT ONLY
FOR THE RACETRACKS AND THE
STATE, BUT MONEY CAN GO TO
OTHERS ALSO, LIKE SENIOR
CITIZENS, PROPERTY TAX RELIEF,
MEDICAL CARE, WHATEVER THE NEEDS
ARE OF THE INDIVIDUAL STATE.
>> Reporter: PROPONENTS HAVE
ESTIMATED NEW JERSEY COULD NET
$100 MILLION A YEAR IN NEW TAX
REVENUE, AND SO, THROUGH A
REFERENDUM AND LEGISLATION OVER
THE LAST FOUR YEARS, NEW JERSEY
TRIED TO LEGALIZE SPORTS
BETTING.
THE FOLKS AT MONMOUTH PARK
THOUGHT THEY WERE SO CLOSE TO
SUCCESS THAT THEY ACTUALLY BUILT
THIS ROOM, ACCORDING TO DRAZIN,
THE FIRST OF ITS KIND OUTSIDE OF
LAS VEGAS, WHERE CUSTOMERS COULD
COME AND PLACE THEIR SPORTS
BETS.
BUT, THE COURTS RULED AGAINST
THE STATE'S EFFORTS, AND SO THE
ROOM SITS EMPTY AND UNUSED.
>> Reporter: NEW JERSEY ISN'T
ALONE.
LEGISLATORS IN AT LEAST FIVE
OTHER STATES, INCLUDING INDIANA,
NEW YORK AND SOUTH CAROLINA,
HAVE TRIED TO LEGALIZE SPORTS
GAMBLING IN RECENT YEARS, AND
THE OBSTACLE TO THEM ALL IS A
FEDERAL LAW KNOWN AS PASPA.
>> PASPA IS THE PROFESSIONAL
AMATEUR SPORTS PROTECTION ACT,
TURNED INTO LAW END OF '92, IT
WAS PROPOSED BY BILL BRADLEY,
WHO WAS THEN A SENATOR FROM NEW
JERSEY.
>> Reporter: AND FORMER NBA
GREAT.
>> FORMER NBA GREAT.
AND THE IDEA WAS HE WANTED TO
MAKE SPORTS GAMBLING ILLEGAL
FROM A FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE.
>> Reporter: AND WHAT WAS HE
TRYING TO PROTECT?
WHAT WAS THE ARGUMENT MADE?
>> THE ARGUMENT WAS - THE
ARGUMENT FOR ANYBODY WHO'S
AGAINST SPORTS BETTING IS ALWAYS
PROTECTING THE INTEGRITY OF THE
GAME.
THEY DON'T WANT MATCH FIXING.
THEY DON'T WANT GAME FIXING TO
BE A PART OF THE CONVERSATION,
WHETHER IT'S AT THE PROFESSIONAL
LEVEL OR AT THE COLLEGE LEVEL.
>> Reporter: GAME FIXING IS
TRYING TO CHANGE THE OUTCOME OF
A GAME THROUGH ILLEGAL MEANS.
SOMEONE WHO'S GOT MONEY RIDING
ON A CERTAIN OUTCOME PERSUADES A
PLAYER OR A REFEREE, OFTEN BY
BRIBING THEM, TO FIX A GAME OR
SHAVE OFF A FEW POINTS.
AND IT'S NOT SOME PHANTOM ISSUE,
IT HAPPENS.
IT HAPPENS IN COLLEGE SPORTS, IT
HAPPENS IN PROFESSIONAL SPORTS.
>> Reporter: WHEN NEW JERSEY
MADE ITS ATTEMPT AT LEGALIZING
BETTING AT THE STATE LEVEL, ALL
THE MAJOR SPORTS LEAGUES, THE
NFL, MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL, THE
NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE, THE NBA,
AS WELL AS THE N.C.A.A., THEY
ALL SUED, ARGUING THAT ALLOWING
BETTING WOULD JEOPARDIZE SPORTS,
AND MAKE FANS THINK THERE WAS
WIDESPREAD CHEATING.
NBA COMMISSIONER ADAM SILVER
LATER CLARIFIED THAT HE'S
AGAINST A PIECEMEAL STATE-BY-
STATE APPROACH TO LEGALIZATION,
SAYING IT OUGHT TO BE A FEDERAL
ISSUE.
BUT DENNIS DRAZIN SAYS, ASK
YOURSELF THIS: WHO'S GOT MORE OF
AN INCENTIVE TO FIX GAMES: THE
CRIMINAL GROUPS THAT CURRENTLY
RUN ILLEGAL BETTING, OR A
REGULATED, MONITORED GROUP LIKE
THE RACETRACK LIKE MONMOUTH
PARK?
>> THEY WOULD HAVE TO TELL YOU,
IF THEY'RE THINKING SQUARELY "WE
THINK THERE'S MORE LIKELY A
CHANCE OF A GAME GETTING FIXED
OR THE MOB GETTING TO A PLAYER
AND GIVING 'EM MONEY, THAN ANY
INVOLVEMENT MONMOUTH PARK COULD
HAVE.
>> Reporter: SUPPORTERS OF
LEGALIZATION POINT TO A FAMOUS
CASE IN 1994 WHERE THE LEGAL
SPORT BOOKIES IN LAS VEGAS
NOTICED SOMETHING ODD IN THE
BETS COMING IN FOR AN ARIZONA
STATE BASKETBALL GAME, ALERTED
THE AUTHORITIES, AND UNCOVERED A
FULL-BLOWN POINT SHAVING SCHEME
UNDERWAY.
>> WHAT YOU'RE SEEING FROM THE
PEOPLE WHO RUN GAMING BUSINESSES
TO THE COMMISSIONER OF THE NBA
IS THEY UNDERSTAND THAT LIGHT IS
THE BEST DISINFECTANT.
AND SO THEY THINK, IF THERE ARE
MORE PEOPLE FOCUSING ON THIS,
MORE PEOPLE PAYING ATTENTION TO
THIS, IF WE ARE TAKING IT OUT OF
THE SHADOWS, AND WE ARE
REGULATING IT, THEN THERE'S
BETTER CHANCES THAT PEOPLE WILL
NOT HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO FIX
GAMES.
>> Reporter: BUT CRITICS POINT
OUT THAT LEGALIZING BETTING
DOESN'T GUARANTEE UNBLEMISHED
COMPETITION.
IN EUROPE, WHERE SPORTS BETTING
IS LEGAL AND WIDESPREAD,
AUTHORITIES TWO YEARS AGO
REVEALED A CRIMINAL NETWORK HAD
TRIED, AND SOMETIMES SUCCEEDED,
IN FIXING OVER 300 SOCCER
MATCHES IN EUROPE, INCLUDING
QUALIFIERS FOR WORLD CUP AND
EUROPEAN CHAMPIONSHIP MATCHES.
CRITICS ALSO POINT OUT THAT THE
U.S. IS ALREADY AWASH IN
GAMBLING, IN ADDITION TO
WIDESPREAD GAMBLING ONLINE,
NEARLY EVERY STATE HAS SOME KIND
OF LOTTERY OR CASINO ALLOWED.
THOSE CRITICS ARGUE THAT
GAMBLING OFTEN HURTS THOSE WHO
CAN LEAST AFFORD IT, IT CAN
SOMETIMES BECOME ADDICTIVE, AND
IT'S THE LAST THING THE
GOVERNMENT OUGHT TO BE
ENCOURAGING MORE OF.
>> YOU KNOW, THE DEBATE ISN'T,
YOU KNOW, WHETHER OR NOT YOU
HAVE A FRIDAY NIGHT POKER GAME
OR HAVE AN OFFICE SUPER BOWL
POOL.
THE DEBATE IS, SHOULD GOVERNMENT
BE ACTIVELY ENCOURAGING AND YOU
KNOW, SPONSORING PREDATORY FORMS
OF GAMBLING?
>> Reporter: LES BERNAL RUNS A
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION CALLED
STOP PREDATORY GAMBLING, AND
WHILE THEIR EFFORTS ARE MOSTLY
AIMED AT THINGS LIKE STATE
LOTTERIES AND SLOT MACHINES,
WHICH, HE ARGUES, ARE A HUGE,
UNFAIR TAX ON POORER AMERICANS,
HE OBJECTS TO THE IDEA OF THE
GOVERNMENT ENCOURAGING EVEN MORE
GAMBLING BY EVEN CONSIDERING
LEGALIZING BETTING ON SPORTS.
>> Reporter: BUT WHAT ABOUT THE
ARGUMENT THAT'S OFTEN MADE BY
LIBERTARIANS AND MANY OTHERS
THAT PEOPLE HAVE TO MAKE THEIR
OWN CHOICES, AND IF SOMEONE
WANTS TO CHOOSE TO GAMBLE THEIR
MONEY, AND I WANT TO CHOOSE TO
PUT MY MONEY IN A SAVINGS
ACCOUNT, THAT THOSE ARE
PERFECTLY VIABLE CHOICES FOR ME
AS AN INDIVIDUAL AND I SHOULD
HAVE THE FREEDOM TO DO THAT.
>> SURE.
ANY LIBERTARIAN, ANY REAL
LIBERTARIAN WOULD BE 100% WITH
US ON THIS ISSUE BECAUSE IF YOU
WANNA HAVE PEOPLE GAMBLE, SURE,
KEEP GAMBLING PRIVATE AND LOCAL.
THAT'S NOT WHAT THIS DEBATE'S
ABOUT.
THIS IS GOVERNMENT, ENCOURAGING
PEOPLE TO DO SOMETHING THAT IS
BLATANTLY DISHONEST, IN TERMS OF
THEY'RE GOING TO, YOU KNOW, LOSE
THEIR MONEY INEVITABLY, BUT IT'S
A VERY FINANCIALLY DAMAGING AND
SOCIALLY HARMFUL ACTIVITY IF YOU
DO IT RELENTLESSLY LIKE WE'VE
SEEN TODAY IN OUR SOCIETY.
>> THE ARGUMENT IS ALWAYS, "IF
YOU LEGALIZE SPORTS BETTING, YOU
ARE ALLOWING MORE PEOPLE WHO
COULD POTENTIALLY BE ADDICTED TO
GAMBLING TO HAVE EASIER ACCESS
TO IT."
AND I DO THINK THAT IT IS A
HORRIBLE SICKNESS, ADDICTION TO
GAMBLING IS SOMETHING THAT
EVERYONE NEEDS TO BE AWARE OF
WHEN THEY ARE RUNNING A GAMBLING
BUSINESS AND GAMING BUSINESS.
BUT I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT'S AN
ARGUMENT YOU CAN MAKE, BECAUSE
IT PRESUPPOSES THAT GAMBLING
DOESN'T EXIST ALREADY.
>> Reporter: WHILE NEW JERSEY'S
LEGALIZATION PUSH IS STUCK IN
COURT, THERE HAVE BEEN ATTEMPTS
IN WASHINGTON D.C. TO UNDO THE
FEDERAL BAN ON SPORTS BETTING.
>> THIS LEGISLATION SEEKS TO
ALLOW ANY STATE THAT WANTS TO,
TO HAVE SPORTS BETTING.
>> Reporter: CONGRESSMAN FRANK
LOBIONDO, REPUBLICAN OF NEW
JERSEY, HAS INTRODUCED A BILL
THAT WOULD GRANT EVERY STATE THE
ABILITY TO OPT-OUT OF PASPA,
GIVING THEM A FOUR-YEAR WINDOW
TO EXPLORE AND IMPLEMENT
LEGALIZED SPORTS BETTING WITHIN
THEIR OWN BORDERS IF THEY
WANTED.
>> Reporter: WHILE LOBIONDO'S
BILL HASN'T GOT A LOT OF
TRACTION, NOT EVEN A HEARING YET
IN THE TWO TIMES HE'S INTRODUCED
IT, HE POINTS TO THOSE RECENT
COMMENTS BY COMMISSIONER ADAM
SILVER, AND THOSE BY SENATOR
JOHN MCCAIN, WHO WAS A PRIOR
CRITIC OF GAMBLING, BUT WHO
RECENTLY SAID THE SENATE SHOULD
HOLD HEARINGS ON WHETHER TO
RETHINK THE FEDERAL BAN.
>> THE COUNTRY IS READY FOR THIS
DEBATE.
YOU'VE GOT A DISCUSSION THAT
WASN'T GOING ON TODAY THAT
WASN'T HAPPENING EVEN A YEAR
AGO.
ONCE WE LAY OUT THE ARGUMENTS,
LAY OUT THE TALKING POINTS FOR
PEOPLE, I THINK PEOPLE WILL COME
TO THE CONCLUSION THAT THIS IS
OK.
>> Reporter: RIGHT NOW, NEW
JERSEY'S PUSH IS BEING ARGUED AT
THE THIRD CIRCUIT COURT OF
APPEALS IN PHILADELPHIA.
IF THE COURT APPROVES THE
STATE'S APPEAL, A DECISION COULD
BE WEEKS AWAY, LEGAL SPORTS
BETTING COULD BEGIN IN NEW
JERSEY ALMOST IMMEDIATELY.
>> Reporter: IF YOU WERE A
BETTING MAN IN THIS REGARD, WHAT
DO YOU PUT THE ODDS ON THE
COUNTRY LEGALIZING BETTING?
>> OH, I DEFINITELY THINK THE
COUNTRY WILL LEGALIZE SPORTS
BETTING.
IT'S JUST A QUESTION OF IN WHAT
FORM, AND WHEN.
>> Reporter: IN THE MEANTIME,
MARCH MADNESS ROLLS ON.
THE AMERICAN GAMING ASSOCIATION
JUST ESTIMATED THAT $9 BILLION
IS BEING BET RIGHT NOW ON THESE
GAMES, AND THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY OF THOSE BETS ARE
ILLEGAL.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
THE HISTORIC LINK BETWEEN SPORTS
BETTING AND ORGANIZED CRIME.
WATCH OUR VIDEO EXTRA ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY
ENGLAND HAS ITS QUEEN, BUT TODAY
THE COUNTRY PAID TRIBUTE TO ONE
OF ITS KINGS.
ONE WHO LIVED MORE THAN 500
YEARS AGO.
TENS OF THOUSANDS TURNED OUT TO
HONOR RICHARD THE THIRD, THE
15TH CENTURY MONARCH WHOSE
REMAINS WERE DISCOVERED UNDER A
PARKING LOT THREE YEARS AGO.
THE KING, WHO WAS PORTRAYED AS A
HUNCHBACKED VILLAIN BY
SHAKESPEARE, WILL BE REBURIED
WITH FULL ROYAL POMP AND
PAGEANTRY LATER THIS WEEK.
KEME NZEREM REPORTS.
>> KING RICHARD III, THE HUNCH
BACK KING WHO AS LEGEND HAD,
MURDERED THE PRINCESS IN THE
TOWER, PARADED BY THE FIELD
WHERE HE DIED, 1485, HIS DEATH
MARKED THE END OF WHAT WE CALL
THE MIDDLE AGES.
HE WAS BURIED IN A CEMETERY
BUT THAT WAS DESTROYED
DURING THE REIGN OF HENRY VIII
BUT THAT WAS DESTROYED IN A CAR
PARK WHEN THEY FOUND THIS.
>> IT WAS AN INTERESTING PROJECT
TO FIND RICHARD III, WE NEVER
THOUGHT WE WOULD FIND HIM.
THINGS SO IMPROBABLE.
>> THE REMAINS ARE HIS, THE
SPINE IS INDEED DEFORMED.
WHY DOES IT MATTER?
FAMOUSLY SAID TO HAVE KILLED HIS
NEPHEWS, THE PRINCES IN THE
TOWER, SO HE COULD TAKE THE
THRONE.
LEGEND SAYS, RICHARD III CREATED
THE MODERN GLAND.
IN SHORT HE'S PART OF OUR
HISTORY.
RICHARD III IS THE FIRST MONARCH
TO BE GIVEN A CEREMONIAL BURIAL
SINCE 1952.
HE WILL BE LAID TO REST IN THE
CATHEDRAL THIS THURSDAY.
>> FOR MORE NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TONIGHT THE WORLD WILL HAVE
40% LESS WATER THAN IT NEEDS
JUST 15 YEARS FROM NOW.
THIS ACCORDING TO A NEW
REPORT BY THE UNITED NATIONS
THAT ATTRIBUTES THE PROBLEM TO
POPULATION GROWTH AND GREATER
AFFLUENCE WHICH IT SAYS DRIVES
DEMAND.
AND THE FOUNDER OF MODERN DAY
SINGAPORE HAS DIED.
LI QUON YU WAS 91.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW,
A LOOK AT A GROWING DEBATE
OVER THE DIAGNOSIS OF SHAKEN
BABY SYNDROME.
A SUBURBAN WASHINGTON FAMILY WAS
INVESTIGATED FOR CHILD ABUSE
IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE DEATH
OF THEIR BABY WHEN A DOCTOR
DISCOVERED FINDINGS LONG
BELIEVED TO BE PROOF OF VIOLENT
SHAKING.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.